Illia Yakovenko
===============
Places: Mariupol, Donetsk, Moscow, Beirut, Kyiv.
Institutions: ICA Moscow, Chto Delat's School for Engaged Art, Ashkal Alwan HWP program. 
Member of the co-operative for creative reseach "Krasnaya Shpana" (Hamburg-Kyiv-Moscow) and Tawaaniya co-operative (Beirut-Istanbul-Kyiv-New-York).


Street opera-performance "Mazeppa - King of post(de)colonial шtudies"
---------------------------------------------------------------------
as part of the Co-operative for Creative Reseach "Krasnaya Shpana"
https://www.facebook.com/krasnaya.shpana

Moscow (originally), August 2015 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YjHTGCO_B4o 13:17

Berlin - Paris (reperformed and institutionalized), October 2015
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AcjddAFLRrQ
https://www.facebook.com/events/1014839625247704/permalink/1027790403952626/

A half-year artistic research on the internet made by the artists, who now have become experts in post(de)colonial studies, will be presented through private and political, by acting, performance and performing.
In the core of the performance lies the real historical figure – Ukrainian hetman Ivan Mazepa, who’s always been an ambivalent figure: A hero for Western Europeans and Ukrainians, a traitor for the Russians. In the period of European Romanticism he became part of a collective myth, a main character for many works of art, his figure is still used for political speculations by different politics from various countries. The performance addresses Mazeppa once again in order to reveal through his figure complexities of the ongoing political processes.
In the times, when in Ukraine is ongoing war fed by the Russian imperialist ressentiment, Kurds are in full arms fighting against ISIS and Turkish government, Russia continues its airstrikes in Syria – we are doing performance about Mazeppa. Traditional political institutions are incapable to react on what is happening in the world, academy is incapable to produce relevant knowledge, only art is capable on all of this.
We had unauthorizedly shown this performance once on the russian soil sprinkled by conservatism, near the former Ukrainian pavilion in the All-Russian Exhibition centre (VDNKh) in Moscow, and now we are placing it into sterile venues created specially for contemporary art.
Do not miss it!


Beirut 1982
-----------
video essay 10:01 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_KueT6s8XEo
Beirut, July 2015


Mercalov's Palm Tree
--------------------
Installation of Donetsk Regional Museum of Local History mini- exhibition on tour
pictures 
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/xl65r53pc3pklsg/AAC1TFjznZji_L3DyKSGz7Uma?dl=0&preview=IMG_3819.JPG
&
Radio show, audio 13:34
https://soundcloud.com/magicdarvin/mercalovs-palmtree-for-pravda

The work pretends to be a nomadic exhibition made by Donetsk Regional Museum of Local History that investigates a story of Mercalov’s Palm tree and how it has become a symbol of the Donetsk region. This story, that goes all the way from the end of the 19th century till the revolutionary events in Ukraine, opens a possibility to trace early Russian industrialization and colonization of the periphery, alienation of an artist from his artwork summoned by the logic of capitalist production. It leads us to more recent exploitation of the artwork in favor of the (former) ruling elite and its place in the Ukrainian insurrection.
„We will tell how the palm was created in the end of 19th century, that was a period of the early industrialization in Russia, and about a tragedy of its author, a simple worker, who had a chance to see it exposed only once during his life. You will hear how later in the beginning of the 21st century the image of the palm tree was exploited by the local authorities, namely Victor Yanukovich. In the final part you will know how the palm appeared on barricades following the recent revolutionary events in Ukraine, and we will think if the revolution brought about a resignification, replacing the Despotic Signifier of the palm.”
From the radio show that is part of the project.
By pretending to be produced by Donetsk Museum of Local History, the work goes further the issues that are narrated inside and addresses current role of post-soviet museums and how can they possibly deal with ongoing political/social/cultural processes, even by using the same means of production that they already have. By the means of production I understand not only those institutional/financial resources that the museums have but also aesthetics and modes of exhibiting they currently work with.

St. Petersburg - Moscow - Helsinki
Summer 2014


Everywhere is Russia
--------------------
video essay 3:38
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nMzH31ZA1kk


Reading group on Badiou's Apostle Paul in Pavel's apartment
----------------------------------------------------------
more info one day


Gender in an Hour (postponed)
-----------------------------
with: Pavel Ovchinnikov
socially engaged, participatory, education based art project
picture https://www.dropbox.com/s/0w7vf58xz42u4ya/inhour.png?dl=0

Is it possible to explain to a group of random people in just one gathering what is Gender and what relation does it have to their life? To affect a person in such a way, so s/he questioned its own identity and tried to understand itself in the relation to the surrounding context? Purged the line between personal and political? Every week we go out on the streets bearing an aim to gather a group of random people. We locate ourselves in different public spaces carrying the cardboards where “Gender in an hour” is written. With everyone who demonstrates his/her interest we arrange a meeting and gather afterwards as a group at prearranged time and place. Most of the visitors see each other at the first time. We have near an hour to hold an exercise, that will be an answer to raised above questions. 
We believe that the person who concieve itself in relation to power falls into antagonism with it. One of the main causes of current situation in Russia with its reactionary, conservative turn not only in the governmental politics but in the heads of the population itself is taking place due absolute absence of the subjects related to critical thinking e.g. gender theory, post-colonial theory and their derivatives in dominant educational institutes. In fact this institutes are appropriated by the government that seeks to get monopoly for mass production of knowledge. The system of traditional values is used as a base to produce such type of culture that would conceal a gap between the reach and the poor, between the exploiters and those who are exploited. In the established political conditions, where we cannot influence dominant educational institutions directly, we have no options left but to constitute alternative educational practices by ourselves.


Moscow Experimental School for Gender Studies
---------------------------------------------
social sculpture
with: Maria Dudko, Pavel Ovchinnikov
August 1 – November 1, 2013

Moscow Experimental School for Gender Studies is an educational-cum-activist initiative for production of social debates on feminism, queer and gender theory. The program includes intensives, lectures, seminars, screenings Q&As, performances, and assemblies. The very structure of educational process aspires to question not only the division of people according to their gender roles, but challenge any hierarchies as such including hierarchies in academic and intellectual community, epistemology of the process of knowledge production and dissemination. Our aim is to introduce a series of topics that are often suppressed, to give a chance to speak publicly for those who have no right for doing so in contemporary Russian society. Sex, body – everything that at the first sight looks private – becomes the instrument of manipulation and repression of power, if it is kept silent. We do not want to keep silent. Among the participants: Oleg Aronson, Tatyana Antoshina, Mila Bredikhina, Mika Ela, Andrey Parshikov, Helen Petrovskaya, Irina Zherebkina.

picture + fb page https://www.facebook.com/GenderSchoolMoscow/photos_stream
website (Russian only) http://gendered-away.tumblr.com/


389-FL
------
more info one day

Deideologization
----------------
more info one day
